# Project Synopsis

Intro: This experimental study involved testing and analyzing the effects of common microplastic material on Yellow Shore Crabs. Our group referenced prior studies that tested these effects, and our hypothesis postulated that High-Density Polyethylene and 
Polypropelyne would confer a decrease in metabolic rate and overall fitness via decreased levels of metabolic activity & subsequent metabolic products. 

Procedure: For our procedures, we were given a total number of twenty crabs for experimental testing. We sub-divided this group into two experiments, Group A and B. Both groups were to be fed microplastics from shaved bottle caps, and each crab was to be administered plastic matter through isolation in individual jars. Each crab was given 2.5 milligrams of MPs, with co-administration of food with group B of oyster meat, with a total combined mass of 2.5 grams. Each jar was then sealed and submerged in a larger 10 gallon community tank, with specific water parameters of 13 degrees centigrade and a salinity concentration of 30 parts-per-trillion. After initial setup, each crab was monitored bi-weekly during the first week of testing. After week one, a mass mortality even occured resulting in the loss of most of group B and around half of group A. Each crab was transfered out of the jar and into the larger 10 gallon tank alongside all remaining food and plastic matter inside each jar. Afterwards, on the final day of data collection, fine needle extractions were performed to obtain haemolymph samples for lactate assays. The remaining crabs were then terminated and dissected to observe and evidence of MP material in the gills and digestive tract.

Results: Preliminary results showed that both groups had lower levels of lactate in comparison to control data used by other lab samples, which had identical water parameters. Group A had a 200 micromolar lactate average and the solitary Group B crab had 40 micromolar lactate. Dissection results concluded that there was no visible plastic material visible underneath optical microscope observation.

Discussion: Lowered lactate levels suggest that MP had an effect towards the overall metabolic fitness of each crab. However the mass mortality even that preceeded final data collection occured from a combianation of hypoxia and ammonia toxicity (the latter applies only to Group B). This was due to the experimental design setup, which for future reference will likely be changed to a communal only setup for future evaluations. Due to the lack of visual MP material found in the crabs gills, as well as an earlier noted observation that the MP material would float at the top of the surface, it is possible that the uptake rate of MPs is lower than anticipated. Group B, however, did have MP material than would stick to the food, and so it is also possible that due to the low sample size Group B may truly have perished from the MP material.

Conclusion: Based on the available data, we can conclude that MP materials reject the null hypothesis and support prior studies that MPs decrease overall crab fitness.
